README.md, before:

<div align="center">

# 🌊 ECS_MHD_2D

### Exact Coherent Structures in 2D Magnetohydrodynamics

*A Python implementation for finding Exact Coherent Structures (ECS) in 2D MHD using JAX*

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.13-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/)
[![JAX](https://img.shields.io/badge/JAX-GPU%20Accelerated-orange.svg)](https://jax.readthedocs.io/)
[![CUDA](https://img.shields.io/badge/CUDA-12.x-green.svg)](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-toolkit)

</div>

---

## 📋 Table of Contents

- [🚀 Quick Start](#-quick-start)
- [⚙️ Environment Setup](#️-environment-setup)
- [📖 Tutorial](#-tutorial)
- [🎯 MATLAB Visualization](#-matlab-visualization)
- [🔧 Troubleshooting](#-troubleshooting)
- [📚 Additional Resources](#-additional-resources)

---

## 🚀 Quick Start

This repository provides tools for hunting Relative Periodic Orbits (RPOs) in 2D magnetohydrodynamics. All Python scripts should be executed from the root directory.

```bash
python jax_scripts/newton.py
```

---

## ⚙️ Environment Setup

> **⚠️ Important:** All convergence is critically dependent on JAX installation.

### Option 1: Use Provided Environment (Recommended)

```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml
```

### Option 2: Manual Installation

```bash
# Create and activate conda environment
conda create -n ECS_MHD python=3.13
conda activate ECS_MHD

# Install JAX with CUDA support
pip install -U "jax[cuda12]"

# Install additional dependencies
pip install matplotlib
```

> **💡 Note:** This assumes CUDA drivers version 12.x. Consult the [JAX documentation](https://jax.readthedocs.io/) for other versions.

**GPU vs CPU:** While the code runs significantly faster on GPU, it can also run on CPU-only systems.

---

## 📖 Tutorial

### Step 1: Generate Turbulent Dataset 🌪️

Start by creating turbulent data:

```bash
python jax_scripts/generate_turbulence.py
```

**Expected output:**
```
Transient of 8192 steps took 7.515015125274658 second...
Generating 256 steps of turbulence took 14.76011872291565 seconds.
Recurrence diagram computed in 2.2505459785461426 seconds
```

> **📝 Customization:** Edit this script to modify flow parameters and numerical grid settings.

### Step 2: Create Initial RPO Guess 🎯

Make an initial guess at a Relative Periodic Orbit:

1. Specify the array `idx=[initial,final]` (MATLAB indexing!) in `jax_scripts/adjoint_descent.py`
2. Run the adjoint descent:

```bash
python jax_scripts/adjoint_descent.py
```

**Expected output:**
```
Creating new RPO guess from temp_data/turb.npz...
using 1088 timesteps of type <class 'int'> 
0: loss=2.239609, walltime=3.824, T=4.260, sx=0.010, completed=True, fevals=1085, accepted=201, rejected=70
1: loss=2.062645, walltime=1.739, T=4.270, sx=0.020, completed=True, fevals=1181, accepted=206, rejected=89
2: loss=1.903478, walltime=1.714, T=4.280, sx=0.030, completed=True, fevals=1153, accepted=204, rejected=84
3: loss=1.759379, walltime=1.694, T=4.290, sx=0.040, completed=True, fevals=1125, accepted=202, rejected=79
4: loss=1.628692, walltime=1.676, T=4.300, sx=0.050, completed=True, fevals=1097, accepted=200, rejected=74
5: loss=1.510585, walltime=1.655, T=4.310, sx=0.059, completed=True, fevals=1069, accepted=198, rejected=69
6: loss=1.405015, walltime=1.483, T=4.320, sx=0.068, completed=True, fevals=833, accepted=194, rejected=14
```

### Step 3: Fine-tune with Newton-GMRES 🔬

Once the error is sufficiently small, refine the solution:

1. Edit `jax_scripts/newton.py` to specify the input file
2. Execute the Newton method:

```bash
python jax_scripts/newton.py
```

**Expected output:**
```
[CudaDevice(id=0)]
Choosing single shooting with adaptive timestepping:
Evaluating objective: 0.223 seconds
Evaluating Jacobian: 0.415 seconds
Transpose walltime = 1.235
Iteration 0: rel_err=3.308e-01, |f|=2.195e+02, fwall=0.222, gmreswall=30.739, gmres_rel_res=2.011e-02, damp=1.000e+00, T=4.602e+00, sx=1.218e-01
Iteration 1: rel_err=1.708e-01, |f|=1.134e+02, fwall=0.232, gmreswall=29.471, gmres_rel_res=1.022e-03, damp=1.000e+00, T=4.601e+00, sx=1.379e-01
Iteration 2: rel_err=1.223e-01, |f|=8.101e+01, fwall=0.235, gmreswall=28.989, gmres_rel_res=1.211e-02, damp=1.000e+00, T=4.628e+00, sx=1.504e-01
```

🎉 **Happy hunting!**

---

## 🎯 MATLAB Visualization

For enhanced data visualization, MATLAB scripts are provided in the `matlab_scripts/` directory.

**Key Features:**
- Recurrence diagrams
- Turbulence animation
- State visualization tools

**Getting Started:**
```matlab
% View recurrence diagram and animate turbulence
matlab_scripts/recurrence.m
```

> **📌 Note:** MATLAB visualization is optional but provides powerful analysis tools.

---

## 🔧 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

| Issue | Solution |
|-------|----------|
| JAX installation fails | Check CUDA version compatibility |
| GPU not detected | Verify CUDA drivers and JAX installation |
| Slow convergence | Ensure GPU acceleration is enabled |
| Memory errors | Reduce grid size or batch size |

### Performance Tips

- ✅ Use GPU when available
- ✅ Verify JAX detects your GPU: `jax.devices()`
- ✅ Monitor memory usage during large simulations

---

## 📚 Additional Resources

- 📖 [JAX Documentation](https://jax.readthedocs.io/)
- 🔧 [CUDA Installation Guide](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-downloads)
- 🧮 [NumPy Documentation](https://numpy.org/doc/)
- 📊 [Matplotlib Gallery](https://matplotlib.org/stable/gallery/)

---

<div align="center">

*Built with ❤️ for computational fluid dynamics research*

</div>

Commit message:

Added python animation of the state

README.md, after:

<div align="center">

# 🌊 ECS_MHD_2D

### Exact Coherent Structures in 2D Magnetohydrodynamics

*A Python implementation for finding Exact Coherent Structures (ECS) in 2D MHD using JAX*

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.13-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/)
[![JAX](https://img.shields.io/badge/JAX-GPU%20Accelerated-orange.svg)](https://jax.readthedocs.io/)
[![CUDA](https://img.shields.io/badge/CUDA-12.x-green.svg)](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-toolkit)

</div>

---

## 📋 Table of Contents

- [🚀 Quick Start](#-quick-start)
- [⚙️ Environment Setup](#️-environment-setup)
- [📖 Tutorial](#-tutorial)
- [🎯 MATLAB Visualization](#-matlab-visualization)
- [🔧 Troubleshooting](#-troubleshooting)
- [📚 Additional Resources](#-additional-resources)

---

## 🚀 Quick Start

This repository provides tools for hunting Relative Periodic Orbits (RPOs) in 2D magnetohydrodynamics. All Python scripts should be executed from the root directory.

```bash
python jax_scripts/newton.py
```

---

## ⚙️ Environment Setup

> **⚠️ Important:** All convergence is critically dependent on JAX installation.

### Option 1: Use Provided Environment (Recommended)

```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml
```

### Option 2: Manual Installation

```bash
# Create and activate conda environment
conda create -n ECS_MHD python=3.13
conda activate ECS_MHD

# Install JAX with CUDA support
pip install -U "jax[cuda12]"

# Install additional dependencies
pip install matplotlib
```

> **💡 Note:** This assumes CUDA drivers version 12.x. Consult the [JAX documentation](https://jax.readthedocs.io/) for other versions.

**GPU vs CPU:** While the code runs significantly faster on GPU, it can also run on CPU-only systems.

---

## 📖 Tutorial

### Step 1: Generate Turbulent Dataset 🌪️

Start by creating turbulent data:

```bash
python jax_scripts/generate_turbulence.py
```

**Expected output:**
```
Transient of 8192 steps took 7.515015125274658 second...
Generating 256 steps of turbulence took 14.76011872291565 seconds.
Recurrence diagram computed in 2.2505459785461426 seconds
```

> **📝 Customization:** Edit this script to modify flow parameters and numerical grid settings.

### Step 2: Create Initial RPO Guess 🎯

Make an initial guess at a Relative Periodic Orbit:

1. Specify the array `idx=[initial,final]` (MATLAB indexing!) in `jax_scripts/adjoint_descent.py`
2. Run the adjoint descent:

```bash
python jax_scripts/adjoint_descent.py
```

**Expected output:**
```
Creating new RPO guess from temp_data/turb.npz...
using 1088 timesteps of type <class 'int'> 
0: loss=2.239609, walltime=3.824, T=4.260, sx=0.010, completed=True, fevals=1085, accepted=201, rejected=70
1: loss=2.062645, walltime=1.739, T=4.270, sx=0.020, completed=True, fevals=1181, accepted=206, rejected=89
2: loss=1.903478, walltime=1.714, T=4.280, sx=0.030, completed=True, fevals=1153, accepted=204, rejected=84
3: loss=1.759379, walltime=1.694, T=4.290, sx=0.040, completed=True, fevals=1125, accepted=202, rejected=79
4: loss=1.628692, walltime=1.676, T=4.300, sx=0.050, completed=True, fevals=1097, accepted=200, rejected=74
5: loss=1.510585, walltime=1.655, T=4.310, sx=0.059, completed=True, fevals=1069, accepted=198, rejected=69
6: loss=1.405015, walltime=1.483, T=4.320, sx=0.068, completed=True, fevals=833, accepted=194, rejected=14
```
This script will effectively run until user-terminated. The state is only saved every 64 steps in temp_data/adjoint_descent.


### Step 3: Fine-tune with Newton-GMRES 🔬

Once the error is sufficiently small, refine the solution:

1. Edit `jax_scripts/newton.py` to specify the input file
2. Execute the Newton method:

```bash
python jax_scripts/newton.py
```

**Expected output:**
```
[CudaDevice(id=0)]
Choosing single shooting with adaptive timestepping:
Evaluating objective: 0.223 seconds
Evaluating Jacobian: 0.415 seconds
Transpose walltime = 1.235
Iteration 0: rel_err=3.308e-01, |f|=2.195e+02, fwall=0.222, gmreswall=30.739, gmres_rel_res=2.011e-02, damp=1.000e+00, T=4.602e+00, sx=1.218e-01
Iteration 1: rel_err=1.708e-01, |f|=1.134e+02, fwall=0.232, gmreswall=29.471, gmres_rel_res=1.022e-03, damp=1.000e+00, T=4.601e+00, sx=1.379e-01
Iteration 2: rel_err=1.223e-01, |f|=8.101e+01, fwall=0.235, gmreswall=28.989, gmres_rel_res=1.211e-02, damp=1.000e+00, T=4.628e+00, sx=1.504e-01
```
This script will effectively run until user-terminated.

If you want to visualize a particular solution, use jax_scripts/animate.py.
```bash
python jax_scripts/animate.py
```

🎉 **Happy hunting!**

---

## 🎯 MATLAB Visualization

For enhanced data visualization, MATLAB scripts are provided in the `matlab_scripts/` directory.

**Key Features:**
- Recurrence diagrams
- Turbulence animation
- State visualization tools

**Getting Started:**
```matlab
% View recurrence diagram and animate turbulence
matlab_scripts/recurrence.m
```

> **📌 Note:** MATLAB visualization is optional but provides powerful analysis tools.

---

## 🔧 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

| Issue | Solution |
|-------|----------|
| JAX installation fails | Check CUDA version compatibility |
| GPU not detected | Verify CUDA drivers and JAX installation |
| Slow convergence | Ensure GPU acceleration is enabled |
| Memory errors | Reduce grid size or batch size |

### Performance Tips

- ✅ Use GPU when available
- ✅ Verify JAX detects your GPU: `jax.devices()`
- ✅ Monitor memory usage during large simulations

---

## 📚 Additional Resources

- 📖 [JAX Documentation](https://jax.readthedocs.io/)
- 🔧 [CUDA Installation Guide](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-downloads)
- 🧮 [NumPy Documentation](https://numpy.org/doc/)
- 📊 [Matplotlib Gallery](https://matplotlib.org/stable/gallery/)

---

<div align="center">

*Built with ❤️ for computational fluid dynamics research*

</div>
